Oh, I've been with your father
and given him notice that theDuke of Cornwall
and Regan, his duchess,
will be here with him thisnight.
How comes that?
Nay, I know not.
You have heard of the newsabroad.
Not I. Pray you, what are they?
Have you heard of no likely warstoward
'twixt Dukes of Cornwall andAlbany?
Not a word.
You may do, then, in time.
Fare you well, sir.
The duke be here tonight?
The better.
Best.
This weaves itself perforce intomy business.
My father hath set guard to takemy brother,
and I have one thing, of aqueasy question,
which I must act.
Briefness and fortune, work.
Brother, a word. Descend.
Brother, I say! Come.
My father watches.
O sir, fly this place.
Intelligence is given where youare hid.
You have now the good advantageof the night.
Have you not spoken 'gainst theDuke of Cornwall?
He's coming hither now, i' thenight, i' the haste,
and Regan with him.
Have you nothing said upon hisparty
'gainst the Duke of Albany?
Advise yourself.
I am sure on't, not a word.
I hear my father coming. Pardonme.
In cunning, I must draw my swordupon you.
Draw; seem to defend yourself.
Now quit you well.
Ha! Yield!
Come before my father!
Light, ho, here!
Fly, brother.
Torches, torches!
So farewell.
Some blood drawn on me wouldbeget opinion
of my more fierce endeavor.
I have seen drunkards do morethan this in sport.
Father, father!
Stop, stop!
What, no help?
Now, Edmund, where's thevillain?
Here stood he in the dark, hissharp sword out,
mumbling of wicked charms,
conjuring the moon to standauspicious mistress.
But where is he?
Look, sir, I bleed.
Where is the villain, Edmund?
Fled this way, sir.
When by no means he couldó
Pursue him, ho! Go after.
By no means what?
Persuade me to the murder ofYour Lordship.
O strong and fastened villain.
Would he deny his letter?
I never got him.
Hark, the duke's trumpet.
I know not why he comes.
All ports I'll bar.
The villain shall not 'scape.
The duke must grant me that.
And of my land, loyal andnatural boy,
I'll work the means to make theecapable.
How now, my noble friend?
Since I came hither, which I cancall but now,
I have heard strange news.
If it be true, all vengeancecomes too short
which can pursue the offender.
How dost, my lord?
O, madam, my old heart iscracked; it's cracked.
What, did my father's godsonseek your life?
He whom my father named? YourEdgar?
Lady, lady, shame would have ithid.
Was he not companion with theriotous knights
that tend upon my father?
I know not, madam. 'Tis too bad,too bad.
Yes, madam, he was of thatconsort.
No marvel, then, though he wereill affected.
'Tis they have put him onto theold man's death
to have the expense and waste ofhis revenue.
I have this present evening frommy sister
been well informed of them, andwith such cautions
that if they come to sojourn atmy house,
I'll not be there.
Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
Edmund, I hear that you haveshown your father
a child-like office.
It was my duty, sir.
He did bewray his practice andreceived this hurt you see
striving to apprehend him.
Is he pursued?
Ay, my good lord.
If he be taken,
he shall never more be feared ofdoing harm.
Make your own purpose, how in mystrength you please.
For you, Edmund, whose virtueand obedience
doth this instant so muchcommend itself,
you shall be ours.
Natures of such deep trust shallwe much need.
You, we first seize on.
I shall serve you, sir, truly,however else.
For him, I thank Your Grace.
You know not why we came tovisit you.
Thus out of season, threadingdark-eyed night.
Occasions, noble Gloucester, ofsome poise,
wherein we must have use of youradvice.
Our father, he hath writ, sohath our sister,
of differences, which I bestthought it fit
to answer from home.
The several messengers fromhence attend dispatch.
Our good old friend, laycomforts to your bosom,
and bestow your needful counselto our businesses,
which craves the instant use.
I serve you, madam.
Your graces are right welcome.
Good dawning to thee, friend.
Art of this house?
Ay.
Where may we set our horses?
I' the mire.
Prithee, if thou lov'st me, tellme.
I love thee not.
Why, then, I care not for thee.
If I had thee in Lipsburypinfold,
I'd make thee care for me.
Why dost thou use me thus?
I know thee not.
O fellow, I know thee.
What dost thou know me for?
A knave; a rascal; an eater ofbroken meats;
a base, proud, shallow,beggarly, three-suited,
hundred-pound, filthy,worsted-stocking knave;
a lily-livered, action-taking,
whoreson, glass-gazing,super-serviceable finical rogue;
a one-trunk-inheriting slave;
one that wouldst be a bawd inway of good service
and art nothing but thecomposition
of knave, coward, beggar,pander,
and the son and heir of amongrel bitch;
and one whom I will beat intoclamorous whining
if thou deniest the leastsyllable of thy addition.
Why, what a monstrous fellow artthou thus to rail upon one
that is neither known of theenor knows thee.
What a brazen-faced varlet artthou
to deny thou knowest me.
Is it not two days since Itripped up thy heels
and beat thee before the king?
Draw, you rogue,
for though it be night, yet themoon shines.
I'll make a sop o' the moonshineof you,
you whoreson cullionlybarber-monger.
Draw!
Away!
I'll have nothing to do withthee.
Draw, you rascal!
You come with letters againstthe king
and take vanity the puppet'spart
against the royalty of herfather, hmm?
Draw, you rascal, or I'll socarbonado your shanks.
Draw, you rogue! Come your ways!
Help, ho!
Murder! Help!
Strike, slave!
Stand, you rogue! Stand, youneat slave!
Help, ho!
Murder! Murder!
With you, goodman boy, if youplease.
I'll flesh ye. Come on, youngmaster.
What's the matter here?
Keep peace, upon your lives.
He dies that strikes again.
What's the matter?
The messengers from our sisterand the king.
What's your difference? Speak.
I am scarce in breath, my lord.
No marvel, you have so bestirredyour valor.
You cowardly rascal, naturedisclaims in thee.
A tailor made thee.
Thou art a strange fellow.
A tailor make a man?
Ay, a tailor, sir.
A stone-cutter or a paintercould not have made him so ill,
though he had been but two hoursat the trade.
Speak yet. How grew yourquarrel?
This ancient ruffian, sir,
whose life I have spared at suitof his gray beardó
Thou whoreson zed!
Thou unnecessary letter!
My lord, if you'll give meleave,
I'll tread this unbolted villaininto mortar
and daub the wall of a jakeswith him.
Peace, sirrah!
You beastly knave, know you noreverence?
Yes, sir, but anger hath aprivilege.
Why art thou angry?
That such a slave as this shouldwear a sword
who wears no honesty.
Such smiling rogues as theserenege, affirm,
and turn their halcyon beaks
with every gale and vary oftheir master,
knowing naught, like dogs, butfollowing.
A plague upon your epilepticvisage!
Smile you my speeches as I werea fool?
Goose, if I had you upon Sarumplain,
I'ld drive ye cackling home toCamelot.
Why, art thou mad, old fellow?
How fell you out? Say that.
No contraries hold moreantipathy
than I and such a knave.
Why dost thou call him knave?
What is his fault?
His countenance likes me not.
No more, perchance, does mine,nor his, nor hers.
Sir, 'tis my occupation to beplain.
I have seen better faces in mytime
than stands on any shoulder thatI see before me
at this instant.
This is some fellow who,
having been praised forbluntness,
doth affect a saucy roughness
and constrains the garb quitefrom his nature.
He cannot flatter, he.
An honest mind and plain, hemust speak truth.
An' they will take it, so; ifnot, he's plain.
These kind of knaves I know,which in this plainness
harbor more craft and morecorrupter ends
than 20 silly ducking observants
that stretch their dutiesnicely.
Oh, sir, in good faith, insincere verity,
under the allowance of yourgreat aspect,
whose influence,
like the wreath of radiant fireon flickering Phoebus' frontó
What mean'st by this?
To go out of my dialect, whichyou discommend so much.
I know, sir, I am no flatterer.
He that beguiled you in a plainaccent
was a plain knave, which, for mypart, I will not be,
though I should win yourdispleasure
to entreat me to it.
What was the offense you gavehim?
I never gave him any.
It pleased the king, his master,very late to strike at me,
upon his misconstruction, whenhe,
compact and flattering hisdispleasure,
tripped me behind being down,insulted, railed,
and put upon him such a deal ofman
as worthied him, got praises ofthe king
for him attempting who wasself-subdued,
and, in the fleshment of thisdread exploit,
drew on me here again.
None of these rogues and cowardsbut Ajax is their fool.
Fetch forth the stocks.
You stubborn ancient knave, youreverend braggart,
we'll teach you.
Sir, I'm too old to learn.
Call not your stocks for me.
I serve the king,
on whose employment I was sentto you.
You shall do small respect, showtoo bold malice
against the grace and person ofmy master,
stocking his messenger.
Fetch forth the stocks.
As I have life and honor, thereshall he sit till noon.
Till noon?
Till night, my lord, and allnight too.
Why, madam, if I were yourfather's dog,
you should not use me so.
Sir, being his knave, I will.
This is a fellow of theself-same color
our sister speaks of.
Come, bring away the stocks.
Let me beseech Your Grace not todo so.
His fault is much, and the goodking his master
will check him for 't.
Your purposed low correction
is such as basest andcontemned'st wretches
for pilferings and most commontrespasses
are punished with.
The king must take it ill
that he's so slightly valued inhis messenger
should have him thus restrained.
I'll answer that.
My sister may receive it muchmore worse
to have her gentleman abused,assaulted,
for following her affairs.
Put in his legs.
Come, my good lord, away.
I am sorry for thee, friend.
'Tis the duke's pleasure, whosedisposition,
all the world well knows, willnot be rubbed nor stopped.
I'll entreat for thee.
Pray, do not, sir.
I have watched and traveledhard.
Some time I shall sleep out; therest, I'll whistle.
A good man's fortune may growout at heels.
Give you good morrow.
The duke's to blame in this;'twill be ill taken.
Good king, that must approve thecommon saw,
thou out of heaven's benedictioncomest to the warm sun.
Approach, thou beacon to thisunder globe,
that by thy comfortable beams Imay peruse this letter.
Nothing almost sees miracles butmisery.
I know 'tis from Cordelia,
who hath most fortunately beeninformed
of my obscured course...
and shall find time from thisenormous state,
seeking to give losses theirremedies.
All weary and o'erwatched, takevantage, heavy eyes,
not to behold this shamefullodging.
Fortune, good night.
Smile once more.
Turn thy wheel.
I heard myself proclaimed
and, by the happy hollow of atree, escaped the hunt.
No port is free,
no place that guard and mostunusual vigilance
does not attend my taking.
Whiles I may 'scape, I willpreserve myself
and am bethought to take
the basest and most poorestshape
that ever penury, in contempt ofman,
brought near to beast.
My face, I'll grime with filth,
blanket my loins: elf all myhairs in knots,
and, with presented nakedness,
out-face the winds andpersecutions of the sky.
The country gives me proof andprecedent of Bedlam beggars,
who, with roaring voices,
strike in their numbed andmortified bare arms
pins, wooden pricks, nails,sprigs of rosemary
and, with this horrible object,from low farms,
poor pelting villages,sheep-cotes, and mills,
sometime with lunatic bans,sometime with prayers,
enforce their charity.
Poor Turlygod.
Poor Tom.
That's something yet.
Edgar, I nothing am.
'Tis strange that they should sodepart from home
and not send back my messenger.
As I learned, the night before,
there was no purpose in them ofthis remove.
Hail to thee, noble master.
Ah!
Mak'st thou this shame thypastime?
No, my lord.
He wears cruel garters.
Horses are tied by the head,dogs and bears by the neck,
monkeys by the loins, and men bythe legs.
When a man's over-lusty at legs,he wears wooden nether-stocks.
What's he that has so much thyplace mistook
to set thee here?
It is both he and she; your sonand daughter.
- No. - Yes.
- No, I say. - I say yea.
No, no, they would not.
Yes, they have.
By Jupiter, I swear, no.
By Juno, I swear, aye.
They durst not do it.
They could not, would not do it.
'Tis worse than murder,
to do upon respect such violentoutrage.
Resolve me, with all modesthaste,
which way thou mightst deserve
or they employ this usage,coming from us.
My lord, when at their home,
I did commend your highness'letters to them.
'Ere I was risen from the placethat showed my duty kneeling,
came there a reeking post,stewed in his haste,
half breathless,
panting forth from Goneril, hismistress, salutations;
delivered letters, spite ofintermission,
which presently they read;
on whose contents, they summonedup their meiny,
straight took horse, commandedme to follow,
and attend the leisure of theiranswer,
gave me cold looks.
And meeting here the othermessenger,
whose welcome, I perceived, hadpoisoned mineó
being the very fellow which oflate displayed
so saucily against yourhighnessó
having more man than wit aboutme, drew.
He raised the house with loudand coward cries.
Your son and daughter found thistrespass
worth the shame which here itsuffers.
Winter's not gone yet if thewild geese fly that way.
Fathers that wear rags do maketheir children blind,
but fathers that bear bags shallsee their children kind.
Fortune, that arrant whore,
ne'er turns the key for thepoor.
But, for all this,
thou shalt have as many dolorsfor thy daughters
as thou canst tell in a year.
O, how this mother swells uptoward my heart.
Hysterica passio, down.
Thou climbing sorrow, thyelement's below.
Where is this daughter?
With the earl, sir, here within.
Follow me not. Stay here.
Made you no more offense butwhat you speak of?
None.
How chance the king comes withso small a number?
And thou hadst been set i' thestocks for that question,
thou hadst well deserved it.
Why, fool?
We'll set thee to school to anant
to teach thee there's nolaboring in the winter.
All that follow their noses areled by their eyes
but blind men.
And there's not a nose among 20
but can tell him that'sstinking.
Let go thy hold
when a great wheel runs down ahill,
lest it break thy neck withfollowing.
But the great one that goesupwards,
let him draw thee after.
When a wise man gives theebetter counsel,
give me mine again.
I'd have none but knaves followit,
since a fool gives it.
Where learned you this, fool?
Not i' the stocks, fool.
Deny to speak with me?
They are sick? They are weary?
They have traveled all thenight?
Mere fetches, the images ofrevolt and flying off.
Fetch me a better answer.
My dear lord, you know the fieryquality of the duke,
how unremovable and fixed he isin his own course.
Vengeance, plague, death,confusion.
Fiery? What quality?
Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,
I would speak with the Duke ofCornwall and his wife.
Well, my good lord, I haveinformed them so.
Informed them?
Dost understand me, man?
Aye, my good lord.
The king would speak withCornwall.
The dear father would with hisdaughter speak,
commands their service.
Are they informed of this?
My breath and blood.
Fiery? The fiery duke?
Tell the hot duke tható
no, but not yet.
Maybe he is not well.
Infirmity doth still neglect alloffice
to which our health is bound.
We are not ourselves whennature, being oppressed,
commands the mind to suffer withthe body.
I'll forbear and am fallen outwith my more headier will
to take the indisposed andsickly fit
for the sound man.
Death on my state!
Wherefore should he sit here?
This act persuades me
that this remotion of the dukeand her is practice only.
Give me my servant forth!
Go tell the duke and 's wifeI'ld speak with them
now, presently.
Bid them come forth and hear me,or at their chamber-door,
I'll beat the drum till it crysleep to death.
I would have all well betwixtyou.
O me, my heart, my rising heart.
But down.
Cry to it, nuncle, as thecockney did to the eels
when she put 'em in the pastealive.
She knapped 'em o' the coxcombswith a stick
and cried, "Down, wantons,down!"
It was her brother that, in purekindness to his horse,
buttered his hay.
Good morrow to you both.
Hail to Your Grace.
I am glad to see Your Highness.
Regan, I think you are.
I know what reason I have tothink so.
If thou shouldst not be glad,
I would divorce me from thymother's tomb,
sepulchering an adulteress.
O, are you free?
Some other time for that.
Beloved Regan, thy sister'snaught.
O Regan, she hath tiedsharp-toothed unkindness,
like a vulture, here.
I can scarce speak to thee.
Thou'dst not believe with howdepraved a quality
O Regan.
I pray you, sir, take patience.
I have hope you less know how tovalue her desert
than she to scant her duty.
Say, how is that?
I cannot think my sister in theleast
would fail in her obligation.
If, sir, perchance she haverestrained
the riots of your followers,
'tis on such ground and to suchwholesome end
that clears her from all blame.
My curses on her.
O, sir, you are old.
Nature in you stands on the veryverge of her confine.
You should be ruled and led bysome discretion
that discerns your state betterthan you yourself.
Therefore, I pray you,
that to my sister you do makereturn.
Say you have wronged her, sir.
Ask her forgiveness?
Do you but mark how this becomesthe house?
"Dear daughter, I confess that Iam old.
"Age is unnecessary.
"On my knees, I beg
that you'll vouchsafe meraiment, bed, and food."
Good sir, no more of theseunsightly tricks.
Return you to my sister.
Never, Regan.
She hath abated me of half mytrain;
looked black upon me; struck mewith her tongue,
most serpent-like, about thevery heart.
All the stored vengeances ofheaven fall
on her ingrateful top.
Strike her young bones, youtaking airs, with lameness.
Fie, sir, fie.
You nimble lightnings,
dart your blinding flames intoher scornful eyes.
Infect her beauty, youfen-sucked fogs,
drawn by the powerful sun, tofall and blast her pride.
O the blest gods!
So will you wish on me when therash mood is on.
Never, Regan.
Thou shalt never have my curse.
Thy tender-hefted nature shallnot give thee o'er
to harshness.
Her eyes are fierce, but thinedo comfort and not burn.
'Tis not in thee to grudge mypleasures,
to cut off my train, to bandyhasty words,
to scant my sizes, and, inconclusion,
to oppose the bolt against mycoming in.
Thou better knowest the officesof nature,
bond of childhood, effects ofcourtesy,
dues of gratitude.
Thy half o' the kingdom hastthou not forgot,
wherein I thee endowed.
Good sir, to the purpose.
Who put my man in the stocks?
What trumpet's that?
I know it; 'tis my sister's.
This approves her letter; shewould soon be here.
Is your lady come?
This is a slave whoseeasy-borrowed pride dwells
in the fickle grace of her hefollows.
Out, varlet, from my sight!
What means Your Grace?
How came my man i' the stocks?
Regan, I have good hope thoudidst not know on't.
Who comes here?
O heavens, if you do love oldmen,
if your sweet sway allowobedience,
if you yourselves are old, makeit your cause.
Send down and take my part.
Art not ashamed to look uponthis beard?
O Regan, will you take her bythe hand?
Why not by the hand, sir?
How have I offended?
All's not offense
that indiscretion finds anddotage terms so.
O sides, you are too tough.
Will you yet hold?
How came my man i' the stocks?
I set him there, sir.
But his own disorders deservedmuch less advancement.
You.
Did you?
I pray you, father, being weak,seem so.
If, till the expiration of amonth,
you will return and sojourn withmy sister,
dismissing half your train, comethen to me.
I am now from home and out ofthat provision
which shall be needful for yourentertainment.
Return to her and 50 mendismissed?
No, rather I abjure all roofs
and choose to wage against theenmity of the air,
To be a comrade with the wolfand owl.
Necessity's sharp pinch.
Return with her?
Why, the hot-blooded France,
who dowerless took our youngestborn,
I could as well be brought toknee his throne
and, squire-like, pension beg tokeep base life afoot.
Return with her?
Persuade me rather to be slaveand sumpter
to that detested groom.
At your choice, sir.
I prithee, daughter, do not makeme mad!
I'll no more trouble thee, mychild.
Farewell, we'll no more meet, nomore see one another.
And yet thou art my flesh, myblood, my daughter.
Or rather a disease that's in myflesh
which I must needs call mine.
Thou art a boil, a plague-sore,
an embossed carbuncle in mycorrupted blood.
But I'll not chide thee.
Let shame come when it will; Ido not call it.
I do not bid the thunder-bearershoot
nor tell tales of thee tohigh-judging Jove.
Mend when thou canst; be betterat thy leisure.
I can be patient.
I can stay with Regan, I and myhundred knights.
Not altogether so.
I looked not for you yet,
nor am provided for your fitwelcome.
Give ear, sir, to my sister,
for those that mingle reasonwith your passion
must be content to think youold, and soó
but she knows what she does.
Is this well spoken?
I dare avouch it, sir.
What, 50 followers?
Is it not well?
What should you need of more?
Yea, or so many, sith that bothcharge and danger
speak 'gainst so great a number?
How, in one house, should manypeople,
under two commands, hold amity?
'Tis hard, almost impossible.
Why might not you, my lord,receive attendance
from those that she callsservants or from mine?
Why not, my lord?
If then they chanced to slackye,
we could control them.
If you will come to me for now Ispy a danger
I do entreat you bring but fiveand twenty.
To no more will I give place ornotice.
I gave you all.
And in good time, you gave it.
Made you my guardians, mydepositaries,
But kept a reservation to befollowed
by such a number.
What, must I come to you withfive and twenty, Regan?
Said you so?
And speak't again, my lord.
No more with me.
Those wicked creatures yet dolook more favored
when others are more wicked.
Not being worst stands in somerank of praise.
I'll go with thee.
Thy fifty yet doth double fiveand twenty,
and thou art twice her love.
Hear me, my lord.
What need you five and twenty,ten, or five,
to follow in a house where twiceso many
have a command to tend you?
What need one?
O, reason not the need.
Our basest beggars are in thepoorest thing superfluous.
Allow not nature more thannature needs,
man's life is cheap as beast's.
Thou art a lady.
If only to go warm weregorgeous,
why, nature needs not what thougorgeous wear'st,
which scarcely keeps thee warm.
But for true need
heavens, give me that patience.
Patience, I need!
You see me here, you gods,
a poor old man as full of griefas age,
wretched in both.
If it be you that stirs thesedaughters' hearts
against their father,
fool me not so much to bear ittamely.
Touch me with noble anger, andlet not women's weapons,
water-drops, stain my man'scheeks.
No, you unnatural hags,
I will have such revenges on youboth
as all the world shall
I shall do such things
What they are, yet I know not,
but they shall be the terrors ofthe Earth.
You think I'll weep.
No, I'll not weep.
I have full cause for weeping,but this heart shall break
into a hundred thousand flaws orere I'll weep.
O fool, I shall go mad.
Let us withdraw.
'Twill be a storm.
This house is little.
The old man and his peoplecannot be well bestowed.
'Tis his own blame hath puthimself from rest
and must needs taste his folly.
For his particular, I'll receivehim gladly
but not one follower.
So am I purposed.
Where is my Lord of Gloucester?
Followed the old man forth.
He is returned.
The king is in high rage.
Whither is he going?
He calls to horse, but will Iknow not whither.
'Tis best to give him way; heleads himself.
Hear me, my lord.
Entreat him by no means to stay.
Alas, the night comes on,
and the high winds do sorelyruffle.
For many miles about, there'sscarce a bush.
O, sir, to willful men,
the injuries that theythemselves procure
must be their schoolmasters!
Shut up your doors.
He's tended by a desperatetrain,
and what they may incense himto,
being apt to have his earabused,
wisdom bids fear.
Shut up your doors, my lord;'tis a wild night.
My Regan counsels well.
Come, out of the storm.